.. _central:general:

UCSWEB
======

.. _central-management-umc:Introduction:

Introduction
============

The UCSWEB is the central tool for managing a UCS domain as well as for
accessing installed applications of the domain.

The UCSWEB is divided into several subpages which all have a similarly
designed header. Via the symbols in the top right, one may launch a
search on the current page (magnifier) or open the user menu (three
bars) (login is possible through the latter). The login at the web
interface is done via a central page once for all sub pages of UCS as
well as for third party applications as far as a web based *single
sign-on* is supported (`Login <#central-management-umc:login>`__).

Central starting point for users and administrators for all following
actions is the UCS portal page (cf. `figure_title <#fig-ucs-portal>`__).
By default, the portal page is available on all system roles and allows
an overview of all Apps and further services which are installed in the
UCS domain. All aspects of the portal page can be customized to match
one's needs (`UCS portal page <#central:portal>`__).

For environments with more than one server, an additional entry to a
server overview page is shown on the portal page. This sub page gives an
overview of all available UCS systems in the domain. It allows a fast
navigation to other systems in order to adjust local settings via UMC
modules.

UMC modules are the web based tool for the administration of the UCS
domain. There are various modules available for the administration of
the different aspects of a domain depending on the respective system
role. Installing additional software components may add new UMC modules
to the system. `UCSUMC modules <#central:user-interface>`__ describes
their general operation.

The subsequent sections detail the usage of various aspects of the
domain management. `LDAP directory browser <#central:navigation>`__
gives an overview of the LDAP directory browser. The use of
administrative settings via policies is discussed in
`Policies <#central:policies>`__. How to extend the scope of function of
the domain administration is detailed in `Expansion of UMC modules with
extended attributes <#central:extendedattrs>`__. `Structuring of the
domain with user-defined LDAP structures <#central:cn-and-ous>`__
details how containers and organizational units can be used to structure
the LDAP directory. `Delegated administration for UMC
modules <#delegated-administration>`__ explains delegating
administration rights to additional user groups.

In conclusion, the command line interface of the domain administration
is illustrated (`Command line interface of domain management
(UCSUDM) <#central:udm>`__), and the evaluation of domain data via the
UCS reporting function are explained (`Evaluation of data from the LDAP
directory with Univention Directory Reports <#central:reports>`__).

.. _central:access:

Access
------

The UCSWEB can be opened on any UCS system via the URL
https://servername/. Alternatively, access is also possible via the
server's IP address. Under certain circumstances it may be necessary to
access the services over an insecure connection (e.g., if no SSL
certificates have been created for the system yet). In this case,
`http <http>`__ must be used instead of `https <https>`__ in the URL. In
this case, passwords are sent over the network in plain text!

.. _central:browser-compatibility:

Browser compatibility
---------------------

The UCSWEB uses numerous JavaScript and CSS functions. Cookies need to
be permitted in the browser. The following browsers are supported:

-  Chrome as of version 85

-  Firefox as of version 78

-  Microsoft Edge as of version 88

-  Safari and Safari Mobile as of version 13

Users with older browsers may experience display problems or the site
does not work at all.

The UCSWEB is available in German and English (and French if it is
chosen as language during the installation from DVD); the language to be
used can be changed via the entry Switch language of the user menu in
the upper right corner.

.. _central:theming:

Switching between dark and light theme for UCSWEBs
--------------------------------------------------

All UCSWEBs have a dark and a light theme that can be switched between
with the UCSUCRV ucs/web/theme. The value of ucs/web/theme corresponds
to a CSS file under ``/usr/share/univention-web/themes/`` with the same
name (without file extension). For example, setting ucs/web/theme to
*'light'* will use ``/usr/share/univention-web/themes/light.css`` as
theme for all UCSWEBs.

.. _central:theming:custom:

Creating a custom theme/Adjusting the design of UCSWEBs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To create a custom theme it is advised not to edit
``/usr/share/univention-web/themes/dark.css`` or
``/usr/share/univention-web/themes/light.css`` since the changes may be
overwritten when upgrading UCS. Instead copy one of these files to e.g.
``/usr/share/univention-web/themes/mytheme.css`` and set the UCSUCRV
ucs/web/theme to *``'mytheme'``*.

The files ``/usr/share/univention-web/themes/dark.css`` and
``/usr/share/univention-web/themes/light.css`` contain the same list of
`CSS
variables <https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Using_CSS_custom_properties>`__.
These variables are used in other CSS files and are the supported layer
of configurability for UCSWEBs. The names and current use case for these
variables will not change between UCS upgrades but new ones may be
added.

Some UCSWEBs import their own local ``custom.css`` file which can be
used to further adjust the design of that page. These are
``/usr/share/univention-management-console-login/css/custom.css``
(`??? <#domain:saml:ssologin>`__),
``/usr/share/univention-portal/custom.css`` (`UCS portal
page <#central:portal>`__) and
``/usr/share/univention-self-service/www/css/custom.css``
(`??? <#user-management:password-changes-by-users:self-service>`__). The
files are empty when installing UCS and are not modified when installing
any UCS update. Be aware though that a given `CSS
selector <https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/CSS/Building_blocks/Selectors>`__
may break when installing any UCS update.

.. _central-management-umc:language:

Language Compatibility
----------------------

UCS ships with english and german localizations preinstalled.


You can switch languages by opening the hamburger menu in the top right corner,
clicking `Switch language` (`Sprache Ã¤ndern`) and selecting the desired language from the displayed list.



bla bla


.. _central-management-umc:feedback:

Feedback on UCS
---------------

By choosing the Help AR Feedback option in the upper right menu, you can
provide feedback on UCS via a web form.

.. _central-management-umc:piwik:

Collection of usage statistics
------------------------------

Anonymous usage statistics on the use of the UCSWEB are collected when
using the *core edition* version of UCS (which is generally used for
evaluating UCS). Further information can be found in 1318.

.. _central-management-umc:login:

Login
=====

UCS comes with a central login page. Logging in to the UCSWEB is done
with the credentials of the respective domain account. On the portal,
the login process can be started either via the user menu an then Login
or by clicking on the entry in the portal itself. If a site (e.g., a UMC
module) requires a login, it will redirect to the central login page. To
log out, the entry Logout in the user menu can be used.

By default a login does not use *single sign-on*. The login can be
changed to use *single sign-on* (SSO) via SAML (cf.
`??? <#domain:saml>`__). To configure this, `ucs-sso. <ucs-sso.>`__ must
be reachable and the UCSUCRV portal/auth-mode=saml has to be set. For
the change to take effect the portal server needs to be restarted:
``systemctl restart univention-portal-server.service``. The login using
the user menu has now be changed. Portal tiles have to be adapted
manually. The default portal has a SSO login tile preconfigured which
can be activated using the portal edit mode.

After successful login, a session is valid for all UCS systems of the
domain as well as for third party Apps if these support web based SSO.
It is possible to enforce a login on the local system by clicking on the
link Login without Single Sign On.

In the login mask, enter the Username and Password of the corresponding
domain account:

-  When logging in with the Administrator account on a UCSPRIMARYDN or
   UCSBACKUPDN, UMC modules for the administration and configuration of
   the local system as well as UMC modules for the administration of
   data in the LDAP directory are displayed. The initial password of
   this account has been specified in the setup wizard during the
   installation. It corresponds to the initial password of the local
   root account. Administrator is also the account which should be used
   for the initial login at a newly installed UCSPRIMARYDN system.

-  In some cases, it might be necessary to log on with the system's
   local root account (see `??? <#computers:rootaccount>`__). This
   account enables access only to the UMC modules for the administration
   and configuration of the local system.

-  When logging on with another user account, the UMC modules approved
   for the user are shown. Additional information on allowing further
   modules can be found in `Delegated administration for UMC
   modules <#delegated-administration>`__.

The duration of a browser session is 8 hours for the SSO login. After
these, the login process must be carried out again. For the login at the
local UCS system, the browser session will be automatically closed after
an inactivity of 8 hours.

By installing a third-party application, such as privacyIDEA, it is
possible to extend the UCSWEB authentication with a two-factor
authentication (2FA). These extensions can be installed from the
Univention App Center.

.. _central:portal:

UCS portal page
===============

Portal pages offer a central view of all available services in a UCS
domain. Requirements strongly differ from small to large environments in
organizations, public authorities, or even schools. Therefore, UCS
implemented a very flexible and individually customizable concept for
portal pages.

As illustrated in `figure_title <#portal-schema>`__, portal entries
(i.e., links to applications/Apps/services; UDM object type
``portals/entry``) can be assigned to none, one or multiple portal
categories. A portal category (UDM object type ``portals/category``) can
be assigned to none, one or multiple portals. A portal itself (UDM
object type ``portals/portal``) renders all portal categories which are
assigned to it.

The portal *domain*, shipped with every installation, is configured on
each server by default. In addition to all installed applications of the
domain, links to UCSUMC as well as the server overview are shown on this
portal page.

Custom portals and portal entries can be defined and managed either via
the UMC module Portal or directly on the portal site.

After logging in to the portal on the UCSPRIMARYDN or UCSBACKUPDN,
members of the Domain Admins group can edit the portal after clicking on
the corresponding entry in the user menu. They now can create new
entries on the portal, modify existing entries, modify the order or the
design.

Advanced settings, such as adding new portals or setting which group
members can see which portal entries can be made using the UMC portal
settings module.

By default, all portal entries are displayed for everyone. In the UMC
module Portal in the category Login, it can be configured whether
anonymous visitors have to log in before they can see entries. It is
also possible to limit certain entries for certain groups. This requires
the LDAP attribute memberOf. Nested group memberships (i.e., groups in
groups) are evaluated.

Further design adjustments can be made in the file
``/usr/share/univention-portal/css/custom.css``. This file will not be
overwritten during an update.

.. _central-management-umc:Assignment-of-portal-settings-module:

Assign rights for portal settings
---------------------------------

The following describes how to make the UMC module Portal accessible to
selected groups or users. This example assumes that a group Portal
Admins has been created and members of this group are supposed to be
given access to the portal settings.

On a UCSPRIMARYDN an ACL file has to be created first, for example
``/opt/62my-portal-acl.acl``. This file has to have the following
content to allow the necessary ACL changes:

::

   access to dn="cn=portal,cn=univention,@%@ldap/base@%@" attrs=children
     by group/univentionGroup/uniqueMember="cn=Portal Admins,cn=groups,@%@ldap/base@%@" write
     by * +0 break

   access to dn.children="cn=portal,cn=univention,@%@ldap/base@%@" attrs=entry,@univentionObject,@univentionPortalEntry,
   @univentionPortal,@univentionPortalCategory,children
     by group/univentionGroup/uniqueMember="cn=Portal Admins,cn=groups,@%@ldap/base@%@" write
     by * +0 break
           

Then execute the following command to create an LDAP object for the LDAP
ACLs:

.. code:: sh

   udm settings/ldapacl create \
     --position "cn=ldapacl,cn=univention,$(ucr get ldap/base)" \
     --set name=62my-portal-acl \
     --set filename=62my-portal-acl \
     --set data="$(bzip2 -c /opt/62my-portal-acl.acl | base64)" \
     --set package="62my-portal-acl" \
     --set packageversion=1
           

If the ACL is to be deleted again, the following command can be used:

.. code:: sh

   udm settings/ldapacl remove \
     --dn "cn=62my-portal-acl,cn=ldapacl,cn=univention,$(ucr get ldap/base)"
           

An appropriate UMC policy can now be created via UMC. The following UMC
operations must be allowed within the policy: udm-portal, udm-syntax,
udm-validate and udm-license. How to create a policy is described in
`Creating a policy <#central-management-umc:Creating_a_policy>`__. Now
the newly created policy only needs to be assigned to the desired
object, in this case the group Portal Admins. This can also be done
directly within the UMC. For this example, navigate to the group module
and edit the desired group there. In the group settings, existing
policies for the group object can be selected under Policies. More
detailed information about policy assignment is described under
`Applying policies <#central:policies:assign>`__.

.. _central:user-interface:

UCSUMC modules
==============

.. _central-management-umc:introduction:

Introduction
------------

UCSUMC (UMC) modules are the web-based tool for administration of the
UCS domain. They are shown on the portal page (`UCS portal
page <#central:portal>`__) for logged in administrators. Depending on
the system role, different UMC modules are available. Additionally
installed software components may bring their own new UMC modules.

UMC modules for the administration of all the data included in the LDAP
directory (such as users, groups and computer accounts) are only
provided on UCSPRIMARYDNs and UCSBACKUPDNs. Changes made in these
modules are applied to the whole domain.

UMC modules for the configuration and administration of the local system
are provided on all system roles. These modules can for example be used
to install additional applications and updates, adapt the local
configuration via UCSUCR or start/stop services.

.. _central:license:

Activation of UCS license / license overview
--------------------------------------------

The UCS license of a domain can be managed on the UCSPRIMARYDN via the
UMC module Welcome!.

The current license status can be shown by clicking the License info
button.

The button Import a license opens a dialogue in which a new license key
can be activated (otherwise the core edition license is used as default
license). A license file can be selected and imported via the button
Import from file.... Alternatively, the license key can also be copied
into the input field below and activated with Import from text field.

Installation of most of the applications in the Univention App Center
requires a personalized license key. UCS core edition licenses can be
converted by clicking Request a new license. The current license key is
sent to Univention and the updated key returned to a specified e-mail
address within a few minutes. The new key can be imported directly. The
conversion does not affect the scope of the license.

If the number of licensed user or computer objects is exceeded, it is
not possible to create any additional objects in UMC modules or edit any
existing ones unless an extended license is imported or no longer
required users or computers are deleted. A corresponding message is
displayed when opening a UMC module if the license is exceeded.

.. _central-management-umc:Operating_instructions_for_domain_modules:

Operating instructions for modules to administrate LDAP directory data
----------------------------------------------------------------------

All UMC modules for managing LDAP directory objects such as user, group
and computer accounts or configurations for printers, shares, mail and
policies are controlled identically from a structural perspective. The
following examples are presented using the user management but apply
equally for all modules. The operation of the DNS and DHCP modules is
slightly different. Further information can be found in
`??? <#ip-config:dns:umc>`__ and `??? <#networks::dhcp::general>`__.

The configuration properties/possibilities of the modules are described
in the following chapters:

-  Users - `??? <#users:general>`__

-  Groups - `??? <#groups>`__

-  Computers - `??? <#computers:general>`__

-  Networks - `??? <#networks::introduction>`__

-  DNS - `??? <#networks:dns>`__

-  DHCP - `??? <#module:dhcp:dhcp>`__

-  Shares - `??? <#shares::general>`__

-  Printers - `??? <#print::general>`__

-  E-mail - `??? <#mail::general>`__

-  Nagios - `??? <#nagios::general>`__

The use of policies (`Policies <#central:policies>`__) and the LDAP
navigation (`LDAP directory browser <#central:navigation>`__) are
described separately.

.. _umc:usage:search:

Searching for objects
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The module overview lists all the objects managed by this module. Search
performs a search for a selection of important attributes (e.g., for
user objects by first and last name, primary e-mail address,
description, employee number and user name). A wildcard search is also
possible, e.g., *m\**.

Clicking on the Advanced options button (the filter icon) next to the
input field displays additional search options:

-  The Search in field can be used to select whether the complete LDAP
   directory or only individual LDAP containers/OUs are searched.
   Further information on the structure of the LDAP directory service
   can be found in `Structuring of the domain with user-defined LDAP
   structures <#central:cn-and-ous>`__.

-  The Property field can be used to search for a certain attribute
   directly.

-  The majority of the modules administrate a range of types of LDAP
   objects; the computer management for example administrates different
   objects for the individual system roles. The search can be limited to
   one type of LDAP object.

-  Some of the internally used user groups and groups (e.g., for domain
   joins) are not shown by default. If the Include hidden objects option
   is enabled, these objects are also shown.

.. _central-management-umc:create:

Creating objects
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

At the top of the table that shows the objects is a toolbar which can be
used to create a new object using Add.

There are simplified wizards for some UMC modules (users, hosts), in
which only the most important settings are requested. All attributes can
be shown by clicking on Advanced.

.. _central:user-interface:edit:

Editing objects
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Right-clicking on an LDAP object and selecting Edit allows to edit the
object. The individual attributes are described in the individual
documentation chapters. By clicking on Save at the top of the module,
all changes are written into the LDAP directory. The Back button cancels
the editing and returns to the previous search view.

In front of every item in the result list is a checkbox with which
individual objects can be selected. The selection status is also
displayed in toolbar at the top of the table, e.g., 2 users of 102
selected If more than one object is selected, clicking on the Edit
button in the toolbar activates the multi edit mode. The same attributes
are now shown as when editing an individual object, but the changes are
only accepted for the objects where the Overwrite checkbox is activated.
Only objects of the same type can be edited at the same time.

.. _central:user-interface:remove:

Deleting objects
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Right-clicking on an LDAP object and selecting Delete allows to delete
the object. The prompt must be confirmed. Some objects use internal
references (e.g., a DNS or DHCP object can be associated with computer
objects). These can also be deleted by selecting the Delete referring
objects option.

Similar to editing multiple objects at once, multiple objects can be
deleted at once via the Delete button in the toolbar.

.. _central:user-interface:move:

Moving objects
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Right-clicking on an LDAP object and selecting Move to... allows to to
select an LDAP position to which the object should be moved.

Similar to editing multiple objects at once, multiple objects can be
moved at once by selecting More AR Move to... in the toolbar.

.. _central-management-umc:notifications:

Display of system notifications
-------------------------------

UMC modules can deploy system notifications to alert the user to
potential errors like join scripts which have not been run or necessary
actions such as available updates. These notifications are shown in the
top right corner of the screen and can be viewed again in the
Notifications menu, which can be opened by clicking the bell icon in the
top right corner of the screen.

.. _central:navigation:

LDAP directory browser
======================

The UMC module LDAP directory can be used to navigate through the LDAP
directory. When doing so, new objects can be created, modified or
deleted in the LDAP directory.

The left half of the screen shows the LDAP directory as a tree structure
whose elements can be shown and hidden using the arrow icons.

Clicking on an element of the tree structure switches to this LDAP
position and displays the objects at this LDAP position in the in the
right side of the screen. The Type selection list can be used to limit
the display to selected attributes.

The Add button can be used to add new objects here too. Similar to the
control elements described in `UCSUMC
modules <#central:user-interface>`__, existing objects can also be
edited, deleted or moved here.

Right-clicking on an element in the tree structure allows editing the
properties of the container or the LDAP base with Edit.

.. _central:policies:

Policies
========

*Policies* describe administrative settings which can practically be
used on more than one object. They facilitate the administration as they
can be connected to containers and then apply to all the objects in the
container in question and the objects in sub containers. The values are
applied according to the inheritance principle. For every object, the
applied value is always that which lies closest to the object in
question.

If, for example, the same password expiry interval is to be defined for
all users of a location, then a special container can be created for
these users. After moving the user objects into the container, a
password policy can be linked to the container. This policy is valid for
all user objects within the container.

An exception to this rule is a value which was defined in a policy in
the form of fixed attributes. Such values cannot be overwritten by
subordinate policies.

The command line program ``univention-policy-result`` can be used to
show in detail which policy applies to which directory service object.

Every policy applies to a certain type of UMC domain object, e.g., for
users or DHCP subnets.

.. _central-management-umc:Creating_a_policy:

Creating a policy
-----------------

Policies can be managed via the UMC module Policies. The operation is
the same as for the functions described in `UCSUMC
modules <#central:user-interface>`__.

The attributes and properties of the policies are described in the
corresponding chapters, e.g. the DHCP policies in the network chapter.

The names of policies must not contain any umlauts.

Referencing objects provides a list of all containers or LDAP objects
for which this policy currently applies.

The expanded settings host some general policy options which are
generally only required in special cases.

-  LDAP filter: A LDAP filter expression can be specified here, which an
   object must match for this policy to get applied.

-  Required object classes: Here you can specify LDAP object classes
   that an object must possess for the policy to apply to this object.
   If, for example, a user policy is only relevant for Windows
   environments, the ``sambaSamAccount`` object class could be demanded
   here.

-  Excluded object classes: Similar to the configuration of the required
   object classes, you can also list object classes here which should be
   excluded.

-  Fixed attributes: Attributes can be selected here, the values of
   which may not be changed by subordinate policies.

-  Empty attributes: Attributes can be selected here, which are to be
   set to empty in the policy, meaning they will be stored without
   containing a value. This can be useful for removing values inherited
   by an object from a superordinate policy. In subordinate policies,
   new values can be assigned to the attributes in question.

.. _central:policies:assign:

Applying policies
-----------------

Policies can be assigned in two ways:

-  A policy can be assigned to the LDAP base or a container/OU. To do
   so, the Policies tab in the properties of the LDAP object must be
   opened in the navigation (see `LDAP directory
   browser <#central:navigation>`__).

-  A Policies tab is shown in the UMC modules of LDAP directory objects
   for which there are policies available (e.g., for users). A
   particular policy for a user can be specified at this place.

The Policies configuration dialogue is functionally identical; however,
all policy types are offered when assigning policies to a LDAP
container, whilst only the policy types applicable for the object type
in question are offered when assigning policies to an LDAP object.

A policy can be assigned to the LDAP object or container under Policies.
The values resulting from this policy are displayed directly. The
Inherited setting means that the settings are adopted from a
superordinate policy again - when one exists.

If an object is linked to a policy, or inherits policy settings which
cannot be applied to the object, the settings remain without effect for
the object. This makes it possible, for example, to assign a policy to
the base entry of the LDAP directory, which is then valid for all the
objects of the domain which can apply this policy. Objects which cannot
apply to this policy are not affected.

.. _central-management-umc:Editing_a_policy:

Editing a policy
----------------

Policies can be edited and deleted in the UMC module Policies. The
interface is described in `UCSUMC modules <#central:user-interface>`__.

   **Caution**

   When editing a policy, the settings for all the objects linked to
   this policy are changed! The values from the changed policy apply to
   objects already registered in the system and linked to the policy, in
   the same way as to objects added in the future.

The policy tab of the individual LDAP objects also includes the edit
option, which can be used to edit the policy currently applicable for
this object.

.. _central:extendedattrs:

Expansion of UMC modules with extended attributes
=================================================

The domain management UMC modules allow the comprehensive management of
the data in a domain. *Extended attributes* offer the possibility of
integrating new attributes in the domain management which are not
covered by the UCS standard scope. Extended attributes are also employed
by third party vendors for the integration of solutions in UCS.

Extended attributes are managed in the UMC module LDAP directory. There
one needs to switch to the `univention <univention>`__ container and
then to the `custom attributes <custom attributes>`__ subcontainer.
Existing attributes can be edited here or a new Settings: extended
attribute object created here with Add.

Extended attributes can be internationalized. In this case, the name and
description should be compiled in English as this is the standard
language for UMC modules.

.. table:: 'General' tab

   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+
   | Attribute             | Description                                   |
   +=======================+===============================================+
   | Unique name           | The name of the LDAP object which will be     |
   |                       | used to store the extended attribute. Within  |
   |                       | a container, the name has to be unique.       |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+
   | UDM CLI name          | The specified attribute name should be used   |
   |                       | when employing the command line interface     |
   |                       | UCSUDM. When the extended attribute is saved, |
   |                       | the *Unique name* of the *General* tab is     |
   |                       | automatically adopted and can be subsequently |
   |                       | modified.                                     |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+
   | Short description     | Used as title of the input field in UMC       |
   |                       | modules or as the attribute description in    |
   |                       | the command line interface.                   |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+
   | Translations of short | Translated short descriptions can be saved in |
   | description           | several languages so that the title of        |
   |                       | extended attributes is also output with other |
   |                       | language settings in the respective national  |
   |                       | language. This can be done by assigning the   |
   |                       | respective short description to a language    |
   |                       | code (e.g., ``de_DE`` or ``fr_FR``) in this   |
   |                       | input field.                                  |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+
   | Long description      | This long description is shown as a tool tip  |
   |                       | in the input fields in UMC modules.           |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+
   | Translations of long  | Additional information displayed in the tool  |
   | description           | tip for an extended attribute can also be     |
   |                       | saved for several languages. This can be done |
   |                       | by assigning the respective long description  |
   |                       | to a language code (e.g., ``de_DE`` or        |
   |                       | ``fr_FR``) in this input field.               |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+

.. table:: 'Module' tab

   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+
   | Attribute             | Description                                   |
   +=======================+===============================================+
   | Modules to be         | The UCSUDM module which is to be expanded     |
   | extended              | with the extended attribute. An extended      |
   |                       | attribute can apply for multiple modules.     |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+
   | Required              | Some extended attributes can only be used     |
   | options/object        | practically if certain object classes are     |
   | classes               | activated on the *(Options)* tab. One or more |
   |                       | options can optionally be saved in this input |
   |                       | field so that this extended attribute is      |
   |                       | displayed or editable.                        |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+
   | Hook class            | The functions of the hook class specified     |
   |                       | here are used during saving, modifying and    |
   |                       | deleting the objects with extended            |
   |                       | attributes. Additional information can be     |
   |                       | found in `??? <#developer-reference>`__.      |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+

.. table:: 'LDAP mapping' tab

   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+
   | Attribute             | Description                                   |
   +=======================+===============================================+
   | LDAP object class     | Object class to which the attribute entered   |
   |                       | under *LDAP attribute* belongs.               |
   |                       |                                               |
   |                       | Predefined LDAP schema extensions for         |
   |                       | extended attributes are provided with the     |
   |                       | object class ``univentionFreeAttributes``.    |
   |                       | Further information can be found in           |
   |                       | `??? <#domain:ldap:extensions>`__.            |
   |                       |                                               |
   |                       | Each LDAP object which should be extended     |
   |                       | with an attribute is automatically extended   |
   |                       | with the LDAP object class specified here if  |
   |                       | a value for the extended attribute has been   |
   |                       | entered by the user.                          |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+
   | LDAP attribute        | The name of the LDAP attribute where the      |
   |                       | values of the LDAP object are to be stored.   |
   |                       | The LDAP attribute must be included in the    |
   |                       | specified object class.                       |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+
   | Remove object class   | If the value of an extended attribute in a    |
   | if the attribute is   | UMC module is deleted, the attribute is       |
   | removed               | removed from the LDAP object. If no further   |
   |                       | attributes of the registered object class are |
   |                       | used in this LDAP object, the *LDAP object    |
   |                       | class* will also be removed from the LDAP     |
   |                       | object if this option is activated.           |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+

.. table:: 'UMC' tab

   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+
   | Attribute             | Description                                   |
   +=======================+===============================================+
   | Do not show this      | This option can be activated if an attribute  |
   | extended attribute in | should only be administrated internally       |
   | UMC modules           | instead of by the administrator, e.g.,        |
   |                       | indirectly by scripts. The attribute can then |
   |                       | only be set via the command line interface    |
   |                       | UCSUDM and is not displayed in UMC modules.   |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+
   | Exclude from from of  | If it should not be possible to search for an |
   | UMC module            | extended attribute in the search window of a  |
   |                       | wizard, this option can be activated to       |
   |                       | remove the extended attribute from the list   |
   |                       | of possible search criteria.                  |
   |                       |                                               |
   |                       | This is only needed in exceptional cases.     |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+
   | Ordering number       | If several extended attributes are to be      |
   |                       | managed on one tab, the order of the          |
   |                       | individual attributes on the tab can be       |
   |                       | influenced here. They are added to the end of |
   |                       | the tab or the group in question in ascending |
   |                       | order of their numbers.                       |
   |                       |                                               |
   |                       | Assigning consecutive position numbers        |
   |                       | results in the attributes being ordered on    |
   |                       | the left and right alternately in two         |
   |                       | columns. Otherwise, the positioning starts in |
   |                       | the left column. If additional attributes     |
   |                       | have the same position number, their order is |
   |                       | random.                                       |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+
   | Overwrite existing    | In some cases it is useful to overwrite       |
   | widget                | predefined input fields with extended         |
   |                       | attributes. If the internal UDM name of an    |
   |                       | attribute is configured here, its input field |
   |                       | is overwritten by this extended attribute.    |
   |                       | The UDM attribute name can be identified with |
   |                       | the command ``univention-directory-manager``  |
   |                       | (see `Command line interface of domain        |
   |                       | management (UCSUDM) <#central:udm>`__). This  |
   |                       | option may cause problems if it is applied to |
   |                       | a mandatory attribute.                        |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+
   | Span both columns     | As standard all input fields are grouped into |
   |                       | two columns. This option can be used for      |
   |                       | overlong input fields, which need the full    |
   |                       | width of the tab.                             |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+
   | Tab name              | The name of the tab in UMC modules on which   |
   |                       | the extended attribute should be displayed.   |
   |                       | New tabs can also be added here.              |
   |                       |                                               |
   |                       | If no tab name is entered, *user-defined*     |
   |                       | will be used.                                 |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+
   | Translations of tab   | Translated tab names can be assigned to the   |
   | name                  | corresponding language code (e.g. ``de_DE``   |
   |                       | or ``fr_FR``) in this input field.            |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+
   | Overwrite existing    | If this option is activated, the tab in       |
   | tab                   | question is overwritten before the extended   |
   |                       | attributes are positioned on it. This option  |
   |                       | can be used to hide existing input fields on  |
   |                       | a predefined tab. It must be noted that this  |
   |                       | option can cause problems with compulsory     |
   |                       | fields. If the tab to be overwritten uses     |
   |                       | translations, the overwriting tab must also   |
   |                       | include identical translations.               |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+
   | Tab with advanced     | Settings possibilities which are rarely used  |
   | settings              | can be placed in the extended settings tab.   |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+
   | Group name            | Groups allow the structuring of a tab. A      |
   |                       | group is separated by a gray horizontal bar   |
   |                       | and can be shown and hidden.                  |
   |                       |                                               |
   |                       | If no group name is specified for an extended |
   |                       | attribute, the attribute is placed above the  |
   |                       | first group entry.                            |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+
   | Translations of group | To translate the name of the group,           |
   | name                  | translated group names for the corresponding  |
   |                       | language code can be saved in this input      |
   |                       | field (e.g., ``de_DE`` or ``fr_FR``).         |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+
   | Group ordering number | If multiple groups are managed in one tab,    |
   |                       | this position number can be used to specify   |
   |                       | the order of the groups. They are shown in    |
   |                       | the ascending order of their position         |
   |                       | numbers.                                      |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+

.. table:: 'Data type' tab

   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+
   | Attribute             | Description                                   |
   +=======================+===============================================+
   | Syntax class          | When values are entered in UMC modules, a     |
   |                       | syntax check is performed.                    |
   |                       |                                               |
   |                       | Apart from standard syntax definitions        |
   |                       | (``string``) and (``integer``), there are     |
   |                       | three possibilities for expressing a binary   |
   |                       | condition. The syntax ``TrueFalse`` is        |
   |                       | represented at LDAP level using the strings   |
   |                       | ``true`` and ``false``, the syntax            |
   |                       | ``TrueFalseUpper``\ corresponds to the        |
   |                       | OpenLDAP boolean values ``TRUE`` and          |
   |                       | ``FALSE`` and the syntax ``boolean`` does not |
   |                       | save any value or the string *1*.             |
   |                       |                                               |
   |                       | The syntax ``string`` is the default. An      |
   |                       | overview of the additionally available syntax |
   |                       | definitions and instructions on integrating   |
   |                       | your own syntaxes can be found in             |
   |                       | `??? <#developer-reference>`__.               |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+
   | Default value         | If a preset value is defined here, new        |
   |                       | objects to be created will be initialized     |
   |                       | with this value. The value can still be       |
   |                       | edited manually during creation. Existing     |
   |                       | objects remain unchanged.                     |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+
   | Multi value           | This option establishes whether a single      |
   |                       | value or multiple values can be entered in    |
   |                       | the input mask. The scheme definition of the  |
   |                       | LDAP attribute specifies whether one or       |
   |                       | several instances of the attribute may be     |
   |                       | used in one LDAP object.                      |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+
   | Value required        | If this option is active, a valid value must  |
   |                       | be entered for the extended attribute in      |
   |                       | order to create or save the object in         |
   |                       | question.                                     |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+
   | Editable after        | This option establishes whether the object    |
   | creation              | saved in the extended attribute can only be   |
   |                       | modified when saving the object, or whether   |
   |                       | it can also be modified subsequently.         |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+
   | Value is only managed | If this option is activated, the attribute    |
   | internally            | cannot be modified manually, neither at       |
   |                       | creation time, nor later. This is useful for  |
   |                       | internal state information configured through |
   |                       | a hook function or internally inside a        |
   |                       | module.                                       |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+
   | Copyable              | Values of this extended attribute are         |
   |                       | automatically filled into the form when       |
   |                       | copying a object.                             |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+

.. _central:cn-and-ous:

Structuring of the domain with user-defined LDAP structures
===========================================================

Containers and organizational units (OU) are used to structure the data
in the LDAP directory. There is no technical difference between the two
types, just in their application:

-  Organizational units usually represent real, existing units such as a
   department in a company or an institution

-  Containers are usually used for fictitious units such as all the
   computers within a company

Containers and organizational units are managed in the UMC module LDAP
directory and are created with Add and the object types Container:
Container and Container: Organisational unit.

Containers and OUs can in principle be added at any position in the
LDAP; however, OUs cannot be created below containers.

.. table:: 'General' tab

   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+
   | Attribute             | Description                                   |
   +=======================+===============================================+
   | Name                  | A random name for the container /             |
   |                       | organizational unit.                          |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+
   | Description           | A random description for the container /      |
   |                       | organizational unit.                          |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+

.. table:: 'Advanced settings' tab

   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+
   | Attribute             | Description                                   |
   +=======================+===============================================+
   | Add to standard       | If this option is activated, the container or |
   | object type           | organizational unit will be regarded as a     |
   | containers            | standard container for a certain object type. |
   |                       | If the current container is declared the      |
   |                       | standard user container, for example, this    |
   |                       | container will also be displayed in users     |
   |                       | search and create masks.                      |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+

.. table:: 'Policies' tab

   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+
   | Attribute             | Description                                   |
   +=======================+===============================================+
   |                       | The tab is described in `Applying             |
   |                       | policies <#central:policies:assign>`__.       |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+

.. _delegated-administration:

Delegated administration for UMC modules
========================================

By default only the members of the Domain Admins group can access all
UMC modules. Policies can be used to configure the access to UMC modules
for groups or individual users. For example, this can be used to assign
a helpdesk team the authority to manage printers without giving them
complete access to the administration of the domain.

UMC modules are assigned via a UMC policy which can be assigned to user
and group objects. The evaluation is performed additively, i.e., general
access rights can be assigned via ACLs assigned to groups and these
rights can be extended via ACLs bound to user (see
`Policies <#central:policies>`__).

In addition to the assignment of UMC policies, LDAP access rights need
to be taken into account, as well, for modules that manage data in the
LDAP directory. All LDAP modifications are applied to the whole UCS
domain. Therefore by default only members of the Domain Admins group and
some internally used accounts have full access to the UCS LDAP. If a
module is granted via a UMC policy, the LDAP access must also be allowed
for the user/group in the LDAP ACLs. Further information on LDAP ACLs
can be found in Section `??? <#domain-ldap:acls>`__.

.. table:: Policy 'UMC'

   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+
   | Attribute             | Description                                   |
   +=======================+===============================================+
   | List of allowed UCS   | All the UMC modules defined here are          |
   | operation sets        | displayed to the user or group to which this  |
   |                       | ACL is applied. The names of the domain       |
   |                       | modules begin with 'UDM'.                     |
   +-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------+

..

   **Caution**

   For access to UMC modules, only policies are considered that are
   assigned to groups or directly to user and computer accounts. Nested
   group memberships (i.e., groups in groups) are not evaluated.

.. _central:udm:

Command line interface of domain management (UCSUDM)
====================================================

The UCSUDM is the command line interface alternative to the web-based
interface of the domain management UMC modules. It functions as a
powerful tool for the automation of administrative procedures in scripts
and for the integration in other programs.

UCSUDM can be started with the ``univention-directory-manager`` command
(short form ``udm``) as the root user on the UCSPRIMARYDN.

UMC modules and UCSUDM use the same domain management modules, i.e., all
functions of the web interface are also available in the command line
interface.

.. _central:udm:parms:

Parameters of the command line interface
----------------------------------------

A complete list of available modules is displayed if the ``udm`` is run
with the ``modules`` parameter:

::

   # univention-directory-manager modules
   Available Modules are:
     computers/computer
     computers/domaincontroller_backup
     computers/domaincontroller_master
     computers/domaincontroller_slave
    [...]
       

There are up to five operations for every module:

-  ``list`` lists all existing objects of this type

-  ``create`` creates a new object

-  ``modify`` for the editing of existing objects

-  ``remove`` deletes an object

-  ``move`` is used to move an object to another position in the LDAP
   directory

The possible options of a UDM module and the operations which can be
used on it can be output by specifying the operation name, e.g.,

::

   # univention-directory-manager users/user move
   [...]
   general options:
     --binddn                         bind DN
     --bindpwd                        bind password
     --bindpwdfile                    file containing bind password
   [...]
   create options:
     --position                       Set position in tree
     --set                            Set variable to value, e.g. foo=bar
   [...]
   modify options:
     --dn                             Edit object with DN
     --set                            Set variable to value, e.g. foo=bar
   [...]
   remove options:
     --dn                             Remove object with DN
     --superordinate                  Use superordinate module
   [...]
   list options:
     --filter                         Lookup filter
     --position                       Search underneath of position in tree
   [...]
   move options:
     --dn                             Move object with DN
     --position                       Move to position in tree
   [...]
       

The following command outputs further information, the operations and
the options for every module. This also displays all attributes of the
module:

.. code:: sh

   univention-directory-manager category/modulename
       

With the ``create`` operation, the attributes marked with ``(*)`` must
be specified when creating a new object.

Some attributes can be assigned more than one value (e.g., mail
addresses to user objects). These multi-value fields are marked with
``[]`` behind the attribute name. Some attributes can only be set if
certain options are set for the object. This is performed for the
individual attributes by entering the option name:

::

   users/user variables:
     General:
       username (*)                             Username
   [...]
     Contact:
       e-mail (person,[])                       E-Mail Address
       

Here, ``username (*)`` signifies that this attribute must always be set
when creating user objects. If the ``person`` option is set for the user
account (this is the standard case), one or more e-mail addresses can be
added to the contact information.

A range of standard parameters are defined for every module:

-  The parameter ``--dn`` is used to specify the LDAP position of the
   object during modifications or deletion. The complete DN must be
   entered, e.g.,

   .. code:: sh

      univention-directory-manager users/user remove \
          --dn "uid=ldapadmin,cn=users,dc=company,dc=example"
                  

-  The ``--position`` parameter is used to specify at which LDAP
   position an object should be created. If no ``--position`` is
   entered, the object is created below the LDAP base! In the ``move``
   operation, this parameter specifies to which position an object
   should be moved, e.g:

   .. code:: sh

      univention-directory-manager computers/ipmanagedclient move \
          --dn "cn=desk01,cn=management,cn=computers,dc=company,dc=com" \
          --position "cn=finance,cn=computers,dc=company,dc=example"
                  

-  The ``--set`` parameter specifies that the given value should be
   assigned to the following attribute. The parameter must be used per
   attribute value pair, e.g:

   .. code:: sh

      univention-directory-manager users/user create \
          --position "cn=users,dc=compaby,dc=example" \
          --set username="jsmith" \
          --set firstname="John" \
          --set lastname="Smith" \
          --set password="12345678"
                  

-  ``--option`` defines the LDAP object classes of an object. If, for
   example, only ``pki`` is provided as options for a user object, it is
   not possible to specify a mailPrimaryAddress for this user as this
   attribute is part of the ``mail`` option:

-  ``--superordinate`` is used to specify dependent, superordinate
   modules. A DHCP object, for example, requires a DHCP service object
   under which it can be stored. This is transferred with the
   ``--superordinate`` option.

-  The ``--policy-reference`` parameter allows the assignment of
   policies to objects (and similarly their deletion with
   ``--policy-dereference``). If a policy is linked to an object, the
   settings from the policy are used for the object, e.g.:

   .. code:: sh

      univention-directory-manager category/modulename Operation \
          --policy-reference "cn=sales,cn=pwhistory,"\
      "cn=users,cn=policies,dc=company,dc=example"
                  

-  The ``--ignore_exists`` parameters skips existing objects. If it is
   not possible to create an object, as it already exists, the error
   code 0 (no error) is still returned.

-  ``--append`` and ``--remove`` are used to add/remove a value from a
   multi-value field, e.g.:

   .. code:: sh

      univention-directory-manager groups/group modify \
          --dn "cn=staff,cn=groups,dc=company,dc=example" \
          --append users="uid=smith,cn=users,dc=company,dc=example" \
          --remove users="uid=miller,cn=users,dc=company,dc=example"
                  

.. _central:udm:example:

Example invocations of the command line interface
-------------------------------------------------

The following examples for the command line front end of UCSUDM can be
used as templates for your own scripts:

.. _central:udm:example:users:

Users
~~~~~

Creating a user in the standard user container:

.. code:: sh

   univention-directory-manager users/user create \
       --position "cn=users,dc=example,dc=com" \
       --set username="user01" \
       --set firstname="Random" \
       --set lastname="User" \
       --set organisation="Example company LLC" \
       --set mailPrimaryAddress="mail@example.com" \
       --set password="secretpassword"

Subsequent addition of the postal address for an existing user:

.. code:: sh

   univention-directory-manager users/user modify \
       --dn "uid=user01,cn=users,dc=example,dc=com" \
       --set street="Exemplary Road 42" \
       --set postcode="28239" \
       --set city="Bremen"

This command can be used to display all the users whose user name begins
with *user*:

.. code:: sh

   univention-directory-manager users/user list \
       --filter uid=user*

Searching for objects with the ``--filter`` can also be limited to a
position in the LDAP directory; in this case, to all users in the
container
`cn=bremen,cn=users,dc=example,dc=com <cn=bremen,cn=users,dc=example,dc=com>`__:

.. code:: sh

   univention-directory-manager users/user list \
       --filter uid="user*" \
       --position "cn=bremen,cn=users,dc=example,dc=com"

This call removes the user user04:

.. code:: sh

   univention-directory-manager users/user remove \
       --dn "uid=user04,cn=users,dc=example,dc=com"

A company has two sites with containers created for each. The following
command can be used to transfer a user from the container for the site
"Hamburg" to the container for the site "Bremen":

.. code:: sh

   univention-directory-manager users/user move \
       --dn "uid=user03,cn=hamburg,cn=users,dc=example,dc=com" \
       --position "cn=bremen,cn=users,dc=example,dc=com"

.. _central:udm:example:groups:

Groups
~~~~~~

Creating a group Example Users and adding the user user01 to this group:

.. code:: sh

   univention-directory-manager groups/group create \
       --position "cn=groups,dc=example,dc=com" \
       --set name="Example Users" \
       --set users="uid=user01,cn=users,dc=example,dc=com"

Subsequent addition of the user user02 to the existing group:

.. code:: sh

   univention-directory-manager groups/group modify \
       --dn "cn=Example Users,cn=groups,dc=example,dc=com" \
       --append users="uid=user02,cn=users,dc=example,dc=com"

..

   **Caution**

   A ``--set`` on the attribute *users* overwrites the list of group
   members in contrast to ``--append``.

Subsequent removal of the user user01 from the group:

.. code:: sh

   univention-directory-manager groups/group modify \
       --dn "cn=Example Users,cn=groups,dc=example,dc=com" \
       --remove users="uid=user01,cn=users,dc=example,dc=com"

.. _central:udm:example:cn-policies:

Container / Policies
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This call creates a container `cn=Bremen <cn=Bremen>`__ beneath the
standard container `cn=computers <cn=computers>`__ for the computers at
the "Bremen" site. The additional option computerPath also registers
this container directly as the standard container for computer objects
(see `Structuring of the domain with user-defined LDAP
structures <#central:cn-and-ous>`__):

.. code:: sh

   univention-directory-manager container/cn create \
       --position "cn=computers,dc=example,dc=com" \
       --set name="bremen" \
       --set computerPath=1

This command creates a disk quota policy with soft and hard limits and
the name *Default quota*:

.. code:: sh

   univention-directory-manager policies/share_userquota create \
       --position "cn=policies,dc=example,dc=com" \
       --set name="Default quota" \
       --set softLimitSpace=5GB \
       --set hardLimitSpace=10GB

This policy is now linked to the user container `cn=users <cn=users>`__:

.. code:: sh

   univention-directory-manager container/cn modify \
       --dn "cn=users,dc=example,dc=com" \
       --policy-reference "cn=Default quota,cn=policies,dc=example,dc=com"

Creating a UCSUCR policy with which the storage time for log files can
be set to one year. One space is used to separate the name and value of
the variable:

.. code:: sh

   univention-directory-manager policies/registry create \
       --position "cn=config-registry,cn=policies,dc=example,dc=com" \
       --set name="default UCR settings" \
       --set registry="logrotate/rotate/count 52"

This command can be used to attach an additional value to the created
policy:

.. code:: sh

   univention-directory-manager policies/registry modify \
       --dn "cn=default UCR settings,cn=config-registry,"\
   "cn=policies,dc=example,dc=com" \
       --append registry='"logrotate/compress" "no"'

.. _central:udm:example:cn-computers:

Computers
~~~~~~~~~

In the following example, a Windows client is created. If this client
joins the Samba domain at a later point in time (see
`??? <#windows-domaenenbeitritt>`__), this computer account is then
automatically used:

.. code:: sh

   univention-directory-manager computers/windows create \
       --position "cn=computers,dc=example,dc=com" \
       --set name=WinClient01 \
       --set mac=aa:bb:cc:aa:bb:cc \
       --set ip=192.0.2.10

.. _central:udm:example:shares:

Shares
~~~~~~

The following command creates a share *Documentation* on the server
fileserver.example.com. As long as ``/var/shares/documentation/`` does
not yet exist on the server, it is also created automatically:

.. code:: sh

   univention-directory-manager shares/share create \
       --position "cn=shares,dc=example,dc=com" \
       --set name="Documentation" \
       --set host="fileserver.example.com" \
       --set path="/var/shares/documentation"

.. _central:udm:example:printer:

Printers
~~~~~~~~

Creating a printer share LaserPrinter01 on the print server
printserver.example.com. The properties of the printer are specified in
the PPD file, the name of which is given relative to the directory
``/usr/share/ppd/``. The connected printer is network-compatible and is
connected via the IPP protocol.

.. code:: sh

   univention-directory-manager shares/printer create \
       --position "cn=printers,dc=example,dc=com" \
       --set name="LaserPrinter01"  \
       --set spoolHost="printserver.example.com" \
       --set uri="ipp:// 192.0.2.100" \
       --set model="foomatic-rip/HP-Color_LaserJet_9500-Postscript.ppd" \
       --set location="Head office" \
       --set producer="producer: "\
   "cn=HP,cn=cups,cn=univention,dc=example,dc=com"

..

   **Note**

   There must be a blank space between the print protocol and the URL
   target path in the parameter ``uri``. A list of the print protocols
   can be found in `??? <#print::shares>`__

Printers can be grouped in a printer group for simpler administration.
Further information on printer groups can be found in
`??? <#druckergruppen>`__.

.. code:: sh

   univention-directory-manager shares/printergroup create \
       --set name=LaserPrinters \
       --set spoolHost="printserver.example.com" \
       --append groupMember=LaserPrinter01 \
       --append groupMember=LaserPrinter02

.. _central:udm:example:dnsdhcp:

DNS/DHCP
~~~~~~~~

To configure an IP assignment via DHCP, a DHCP computer entry must be
registered for the MAC address. Further information on DHCP can be found
in `??? <#module:dhcp:dhcp>`__.

.. code:: sh

   univention-directory-manager dhcp/host create \
       --superordinate "cn=example.com,cn=dhcp,dc=example,dc=com" \
       --set host="Client222" \
       --set fixedaddress="192.0.2.110" \
       --set hwaddress="ethernet 00:11:22:33:44:55"

If it should be possible for a computer name to be resolved via DNS, the
following commands can be used to configure a forward (host record) and
reverse resolution (PTR record).

.. code:: sh

   univention-directory-manager dns/host_record create \
       --superordinate "zoneName=example.com,cn=dns,dc=example,dc=com" \
       --set name="Client222" \
       --set a="192.0.2.110"

   univention-directory-manager dns/ptr_record create \
       --superordinate "zoneName=0.168.192.in-addr.arpa,cn=dns,"\
   "dc=example,dc=com" \
       --set address="110" \
       --set ptr_record="Client222.example.com."

Further information on DNS can be found in `??? <#networks:dns>`__.

.. _central:udm:example:extendedattr:

Extended attributes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Extended attributes can be used to expand the functional scope of UMC
modules, see `Expansion of UMC modules with extended
attributes <#central:extendedattrs>`__. In the following example, a new
attribute is added, where the car license number of the company car can
be saved for each user. The values are managed in the object class
``univentionFreeAttributes`` created specially for this purpose:

.. code:: sh

   univention-directory-manager settings/extended_attribute create \
       --position "cn=custom attributes,cn=univention,dc=example,dc=com" \
       --set name="CarLicense" \
       --set module="users/user" \
       --set ldapMapping="univentionFreeAttribute1" \
       --set objectClass="univentionFreeAttributes" \
       --set longDescription="License plate number of the company car" \
       --set tabName="Company car" \
       --set multivalue=0 \
       --set syntax="string" \
       --set shortDescription="Car license"

.. _central:udm_rest_api:

HTTP API of domain management
=============================

UCS provides an HTTP API for UDM which can be used to inspect, modify,
create and delete UDM objects via HTTP requests.

For more information on the API please refer to
`??? <#developer-reference>`__.

.. _central:reports:

Evaluation of data from the LDAP directory with Univention Directory Reports
============================================================================

Univention Directory Reports offers the possibility of creating
predefined reports for any objects to be managed in the directory
service.

The structure of the reports is defined using templates. The
specification language developed for this purpose allows the use of
wildcards, which can be replaced with values from the LDAP directory.
Any number of report templates can be created. This allows users to
select very detailed reports or just create simple address lists, for
example.

The creation of the reports is directly integrated in the UMC modules
Users, Groups and Computers. Alternatively, the command line program
``univention-directory-reports`` can be used.

Six report templates are already provided with the delivered Univention
Directory Reports, which can be used for users, groups and computers.
Three templates create PDF documents and three CSV files, which can be
used as an import source for other programs. Further templates can be
created and registered.

.. _central:reports:create:

Creating reports via UCSUMC modules
-----------------------------------

To create a report, you need to open the UMC module Users, Groups or
Computers. Then all the objects which should be covered by the report
must be selected (you can select all objects by clicking the checkbox
the left of Name). Clicking on More AR Create report allows to choose
between the Standard Report in PDF format and the Standard CSV Report in
CSV format.

The reports created via a UMC module are stored for 12 hours and then
deleted by a cron job. The settings for when the cron job should run and
how long the reports should be stored for can be defined via two UCSUCR
variables:

-  directory/reports/cleanup/cron Defines when the cron job should be
   run.

-  directory/reports/cleanup/ageDefines the maximum age of a report
   document in seconds before it is deleted.

.. _central-management-umc:Creating_reports_on_the_command_line:

Creating reports on the command line
------------------------------------

Reports can also be created via the command line with the
``univention-directory-reports`` program. Information on the use of the
program can be viewed using the ``--help`` option.

The following command can be used to list the report templates available
to users, for example:

.. code:: sh

   univention-directory-reports -m users/user -l
           

.. _central-management-umc:Adjustment_expansion_of_Univention_Directory_Reports:

Adjustment/expansion of Univention Directory Reports
----------------------------------------------------

Existing reports can be created directly with the presettings. Some
presettings can be adapted using UCSUCR. For example, it is possible to
replace the logo that appears in the header of each page of a PDF
report. To do so, the value of the UCSUCRV directory/reports/logo can
include the name of an image file. The usual image formats such as JPEG,
PNG and GIF can be used. The image is automatically adapted to a fixed
width of 5.0 cm.

In addition to the logo, the contents of the report can also be adapted
by defining new report templates.
